[Music]
now when you think about it what could
be more frightful than whizzing through
the air at over 500 miles per hour in a
big pressurized aluminum tube six miles
up where the air outside is too thin to
breathe and the temperature is lower
than minus 40 degrees Fahrenheit
well hey count me in any one of these
things is dangerous by itself and
commercial flights include them all at
the same time
no wonder thousands of people are afraid
to fly
they're only protected by a thin metal
skin but our planes really that
dangerous the good news is that
statistics are on the side of aviation
they prove that airplanes are the safest
means of travel airlines tell us that
it's a thousand times safer to fly than
to drive and the most dangerous part of
your trip is on the way to the airport
how on earth is that possible well let's
check out the figures and make our own
conclusions airplanes around the world
make 138 thousand flights a day forty
eight million flights a year transport
five billion passengers only one
airplane crash happens per about every
16 million flights on average and about
500 people don't survive in all the
crashes that happen in a year so pencil
that out and you'll find that there's
one chance in ten million of not making
it to your destination in comparison
about 1.5 million people will be in a
car crash and not walk away from it each
year Road crash statistics say that
about 3,300 people lose their lives in
car crashes daily apart from that 20 to
30 million people get injured in car
crashes every year head shakers can
contradict that this comparison isn't
valid because there are men
more cars in the world in planes and the
total distance they drive is much longer
than that which the planes cover but
still if you make super complex
calculations of miles per passenger a
plane will be safer than a car there's a
myth that there's no chances of
surviving a plane crash but it has
little to do with reality
airplanes are being constructed by
people who are experts at aerodynamics
and gravitational forces let's look at
the statistics again there have been 568
airplane accidents in the u.s. between
1983 and 2000 the number of people who
didn't survive was only 5% of all the
passengers who were on board even if we
don't take into account minor accidents
and take only serious crashes that
involve hitting the ground damaging the
plane's fuselage and fire the number of
people who survived is about 50% private
jets are less safe than commercial ones
because there are fewer safety
precautions and the pilots don't have to
go through such strict screening another
popular belief is that traveling by
railroad is the safest means of
transport but statistics reveal that the
number of train crashes is much more
frequent than in aviation it's just that
they don't cause as many casualties and
don't get as much media coverage any
plane crash even involving a small jet
immediately attracts media attention air
catastrophes always hit the news and are
discussed long after there will be
dozens of accounts expert opinions
photographs of the crash area and
discussions about blackbox deciphering
it all leads to the negative opinion
that aviation is a very dangerous means
of transport and yet investigations of
plane crashes confirm that they usually
happen due to coincidental combinations
of very rare circumstances which almost
never happen at the same time this means
that if a passenger boards a random
flight every day statistically it would
take them 21,000 years to get into an
air crash the chances of survival are
much higher if the plane crash lands on
water even if it's not meant for it
specialists say that ditching boosts
the chances of survival by 50% the two
most common fears that passengers have
on board the plane are engine failure
and turbulence let's see if there's
actually anything to be afraid of many
people think that if an engine breaks
down the plane will plummet to earth the
truth is that the engines aren't exactly
what keeps the plane going the name
itself air and plane hints at its
ability to glide through the air let's
dust off the physics when an object
soars through the air at a high speed
zone of high pressure appears beneath it
the faster the speed is the stronger the
pressure will be if both engines break
down in the air which almost never
happens
inertia won't allow it to drop straight
down it'll lower slowly and gradually as
it continues to move forward in such a
situation the plane can glide for 50
minutes do you think you could drive a
car if it had a broken engine I doubt it
the air is like a road for the plane if
you imagine that the air is like a cake
with many layers these layers will have
different density mobility and
temperature air isn't uniform it
consists of different gases warmer
layers move upwards and colder ones
downwards that's why there's no air
bumps as you might imagine them the
plane just moves up and then down say
after takeoff when the plane has risen
the autopilot lowers the engine thrust
our bodies will perceive it as falling
you can also feel as if you're falling
when the plane straightens out at a
certain height in fact it's just rising
its tail to the same level as the nose
when the plane goes through layers of
air of different density it can start
vibrating this is what we know as
turbulence you could compare it to a car
driving on a bumpy road you might be
angry that the road is bad but you don't
think your life is at risk right it's
probably what pilots think too sometimes
turbulence can happen when the air is
clear or there are a few high level
clouds
it's called clear air turbulence clever
name it's more difficult to detect
beforehand and in this case the pie
won't have a chance to ask you to stay
in your seat before the plane gets into
a turbulent zone it's much more
predictable when it's cloudy and the
plane flies above the sea or mountains
the pilot will turn on special lights
and tell the passengers to fasten seat
belts and stay in their seats now have
you ever experienced severe turbulence
tell me about it in the comments
turbulence is a common thing and it's
usually so light that passengers hardly
notice it at all heavy turbulence
doesn't happen as frequently though it
can cause discomfort or even jostle
passengers in the most extreme cases it
does no harm to the plane itself the
construction of modern jets is meant to
bear the strongest winds so that their
skin engines and other parts remain
intact
the only time strong wind can pose a
real danger is during takeoff and
landing
but in that case the pilot will just go
to a reserve airfield considering all
that the most dangerous thing that could
come from turbulence would be if a
carry-on falls out from the compartment
and hit someone that's why flight
attendants see to it that all the
overheads are tightly closed but who's
in charge of all the crews and thinks up
all these aviation rules the system of
aviation is built like an ideal pyramid
it has billions of dollars millions of
employees and dozens of companies in it
the head of this pyramid is the
International Civil Aviation
Organization or ICAO it's the ICAO who
makes the rules such as ICAO controls
the number of hours all the pilots fly
in the whole world
specialists make mathematical
calculations to handle the landings of
the planes where the difference could be
just 40 seconds between them the service
and certification of planes and even the
pilots food standards are controlled by
the same organization the ICAO has a
strict rule about food for pilots all
the meals for the crew are prepared
separately the two pilots can have the
same meal this is done so that the
second pilot can replace the first one
if he gets food poisoning there only
human after all but sometimes pilots
seem more like superheroes than common
people the person who's given the
control stick has studied piloting for
at least 10 years that's a whole lot
more than anyone had to study to be out
driving their car around
pilots can often speak several languages
have excellent computer skills have
great reflexes and excellent sight when
training on special flight simulators
they have to solve situations at
different levels of difficulty that's
why the pilot is capable of solving
almost any issue with his head or hands
the ICAO assumes though that even the
most experienced pilots could make a
mistake that's why there's always a
second pilot and other backup systems
the only thing the pilot has to control
all by himself is the takeoff and
landing when the planes in the air it's
on autopilot that's not to say that
pilots don't do anything but sit around
the cabin during the flight they're
constantly in touch with a flight
control center adjusting the autopilot
if necessary and keeping everything
under control this is all to make your
flight smooth and pleasant and bring you
to your destination safe and sound now
if you ever feel uneasy in that seat 6
miles above the ground just remember
this video and enjoy your flight
but be careful driving your car to the
airport hey if you learn something new
today then give the video a like and
share it with a friend
and here are some other videos I think
you'll enjoy just click the left or
right video and remember stay on the
bright side of life